Project Set-up
When you open Maya, you get the following window.
Notice at the top, the bar says "Student Version: untitled*".
Not only have you not assigned your scene a name, it also doesn't have a project associated with it.
You're going to want to stay very organized with your project files and Maya has a project structure for you.
topBar.png




If you haven't already, click File -> Project Window to get a window like this.
Click "New" on the right of Current Project.
Change the Current Project field to your story group title.

Maya already sets up folders like scenes, assets, images, etc. for you as well so you can stay organized.
All your scene files should go in scenes, reference images can go in sourceimages, etc. As long as everyone in your group follows the same format, you can stay organized within your group.
Hit Accept.
setProject.png




From this point on, every time you create a new scene, SET YOUR PROJECT.
1. File -> Set Project
2. When this window pops up, select the folder with your story group title.
3. Click Set.
setProject1.png



Now when you save your untitled scene, the prompt will automatically redirect you to the Current Project which in this case is Story Group Title\scenes.
To your left you can also use the dropdown menu to change which project this scene is set to.
saveProject.png

Also, SAVE AS MAYA ASCII. MAYA ASCII IS THE FILE TYPE YOU WANT TO SAVE IT AS. SAVE YOUR SCENE AS A MAYA ASCII. USE MAYA ASCII TO SAVE YOUR SCENE.



The default setting for undo in Maya is 50 undos. Click Windows -> Settings/Preferences -> Preferences.
On the left, there's a window of Categories. Under
Settings, find Undo and change your Queue setting to Infinite.
Handy Tools
Hold down x: snap to grid when translating
Hold down v: snap to vertex when translating
Hold down j: snap tool for move, rotate, scale
Hold down g: opens last used tool (VERY USEFUL-so you don't have to constantly go to Edit Mesh -> blah)
Scale tool to flatten/straighten edges/faces
ctl-alt-s will save your file under the original file name + increment. (Fox.ma, ctl-alt-s, Fox_001.ma)


On your menu bar, you should see magnet icons. Those are the different snaps you can choose to have on at all times. 
The first icon snaps to grids, then snaps to curves, snaps to points, snaps to projected center.
snaps.png


Change your move tool settings so that retain component spacing is not checked.
This will make snapping multiple vertices or edges much easier.
retain.jpg




Advanced Modeling
This week we'll be modeling fox using different techniques. It's up to you to use these techniques as you see fit!
(Edit: It ended up looking like a pig so be careful of copying me artistically.)

Download this side view of a fox to use as a reference.
When modeling your own assets you'll be using your character sheets as a reference.
original_fox.jpg



This is an example of how you can use a front and side reference sheet to help model your character. We'll be doing something similar.
reference.png



To bring in your reference image, first move the downloaded fox image into the sourceimages folder of your project directory. This way, you stay organized and when you share project folders with your group members, you don't need to worry about updating file paths.

Save your untitled Maya scene as a ASCII file type and call it fox1. Your top bar should look something like this.
filePath.jpg



In Maya, press spacebar to get out of Perspective mode and enter side view mode by pressing spacebar again while your cursor is over side view mode.
Press View -> Image Plane -> Import Image and Maya should automatically open up a box to your sourceimages directory. Double click the foxReference.jpg image you saved. If you didn't go into side view mode, your reference image would have imported at whatever angle the camera was facing which would make the orthogonal views useless.

imagePlane.png


You should have an image plane with the fox in your scene now. I personally like to translate the fox -20 units on he x axis so that it's out of the way in perspective mode since I'll only need it for side view mode. Here's what my scene looks like now.
ImagePersp.jpg




Go back to side view mode and we can start box modeling.
Create a cube from the polygon primitives menu. For the love of all that is good and green on this sweet earth please don't use NURBS.
Go into the channel box and click Inputs to change the subdivision values to 2 for x,y,z.
If you can't find the channel box, click the blue icon on the top right as seen below. Also, be sure that you have your cube selected.
channel.jpg




Next, go to Shading -> X-Ray. This makes your mesh half transparent so that we can model it while looking at the reference image.
xRay.png


The key to box modeling is to start out very blocky and slowly adding more detail. Don't be afraid to have an abstract model for the majority of the time. Always have a reason for every edge loop you add. Avoid adding edge loops unless you're going to move, scale, or rotate it.

Step 1: Torso
Start off with fitting your cube into the base of the torso. Notice that my edges end at the armpit and thigh of the legs. Keep in mind as you're modeling where edges along your model should go. (Arms, legs, head, etc.)
BOX.jpg




In side view mode, it's hard to tell that you have edges/faces on top of each other. Use Shift-click+drag to select/deselect edges/faces.
Here I selected all the faces that you can see from side view but also the faces facing to the right that you can't see here.
highlight.jpg

See that I've selected all the faces including these front facing ones. I want to extrude these front facing faces but not the side ones.
frontFaces.jpg

So I shift-deselect just the side facing faces like so.
deselct.png


And voila! You can't tell in this view but if you go back to perspective view, you'll see the front faces are highlighted. You can also tell by the manipulator in this image. I used the same technique on the edges to fit the cube along the side of the fox.
frontfacing.jpg




BE SURE TO UNDERSTAND THIS CONCEPT BEFORE MOVING ON. Play around with selecting/deselecting edges and faces around with just the cube and look back and forth between side view and perspective view so that you are doing what you expect to be doing.
The biggest gotcha here is that you might be selecting faces or edges behind what you see without realizing it.
It might be helpful to go into Panels -> Layouts -> Two Panes Side by Side. So you can see your side view and perspective view at the same time.

gotcha.png

Next, use the hotkey CTL-E to extrude those faces and pull them to the front of the fox's arm.

arm.jpg


Extrude those same faces again and bring it up to the neck. You start to see why having the hotkeys QWER is so useful. While doing this, you switch between the translate, scale, and rotate tool constantly. In this example, I extruded, moved the faces near the neck, scaled down the faces to fit against the image, and rotated the faces so they fit along the curve of the fox's anatomy.
neck.jpg



Recall from lecture when we talked about good edgeflow. You want to constantly maintain good edgeflow so I fixed mine by adding an edgeloop between the arm and neck which I scaled and moved to fit against the neck. I also moved some spacing on the torso and arm. Now everything looks somewhat evenly spaced and my edges are along the arms, legs, and neck.
edgeflow.jpg




Next, extrude the faces on the back to where you think the rump of the fox will end. The edgeflow here is unbroken but it's still rough near the butt of the fox.
rump.jpg



I added an edge loop to make it smoother.
rumpEdge.jpg


Once you're satisfied with the torso, let's delete by type -> history. Then save this fox1.ma scene.
For good practice, let's click Save As and create a foxLatest.ma file, then a fox2.ma file.
We'll be working in fox2.ma from now on and have a backup called fox1.ma and your group members would be using foxLatest.ma.


Step 2: Front leg (Extrusion method)
There are two ways to model limbs in general. You can either extrude off of the main mesh or create a separate object that you later "stitch" vertices to. It's up to you which method you want to use as I'll be showing you both methods with the legs.
Also, don't worry about modeling all four legs! We'll be making one front leg and one back leg, then copy it over to the other side.



Find the face closest to the front leg and extrude it outwards.
shoulder.jpg




Then extrude the bottom face of the "shoulder" and use the side view to check out long it should be.
upperArm.jpg




I've already added edge loops already to even out the spacing. Notice that I added in another edge loop where the arm is bony from the knuckles. I may want to add more edge loops in the future but remember, we want to keep things blocky and abtract.
lowerArm.jpg




I extruded more faces, tweaked my edges, and got this.
foot.jpg



Something to keep in mind when modeling is whether you're going to smooth your mesh or not. Often times, when modeling, I'll extrude muscular areas farther out than the reference sheet says. This is because when I smooth, it'll smooth down to where the muscle should end.

Here's a screenshot of my front leg smoothed out. I've lost a lot of the sharp bony edges of the foot so I'm going to want to add in more details to achieve that bony look. I'm also probably going to want to extrude certain faces out farther than what looks natural so that when I smooth my mesh, I can get the look of a jutting knuckle. But again, I'll worry about details later.
smooth.jpg




Step 3: Back Leg (Stitching Method)
The stitching method works by merging vertices together. This means, the number of vertices on the area you're going to stitch onto MUST EQUAL the number of vertices of the area that is being stitched into the main mesh.

Note that I have 6 vertices where the back leg mesh will fit in.

vertexCount.jpg






Create a cube. Go into the Channel box -> Inputs -> Subdivisions Depth to 2. This should give you a cube like the image below with 6 vertices on one side. I moved the cube out of the way of the original mesh like so.
boxVertex.jpg




In side view, move your cube so that it fits along the face where the back leg should begin. Eyeball where the vertices should go and adjust accordingly.
matchVertices.jpg



Like we did with the front leg, extrude faces, add edge loops, and adjust to maintain good edgeflow. I went ahead and got this.
backLeg.jpg



Let's delete by type -> history of BOTH our objects just in case.
Then, go into Face Mode, and delete the faces that will be facing each other when stitching on both objects.
deleteFaces1.jpg

deleteFaces2.jpg



Bring in your back leg object as close as possible to the fox mesh. Leave some space so that you can easily see which vertices match with each other. Select both objects, then click Mesh -> Combine.
Now your two objects are treated as one.
combine.png



Go into Vertex mode and highlight the two vertices that you want merged together.
vertices.jpg




Click Edit Mesh -> Merge to center.
mergeTocenter.png




The vertices will snap to the space between them and become one. Do this for all 6 pairs of vertices and make sure your mesh is SEALED. When you're done stitching vertices make sure you don't have any gaps, otherwise, your skinning will be ruined.
mergedVertices.jpg




This is what your mesh should look like so far. I've made some edits to the width of the back leg and moved edges around so that the transition to legs is a lot smoother.
If I had a front plane reference image, I would use it to determine the width of the body and legs but for now, I'm just going to eyeball it.
legsFin.jpg
Here it is smoothed out.
smoothFin.jpg



Let's see how are fox looks like with 4 legs. Go into top view mode, find the vertices that represent the very center of the fox and with your translate tool, hold down x which will "snap" your vertices to the nearest axis. Line up your vertices so that they line up with the slightly thicker line on the grid. This is so that we can mirror our current mesh over the correct axis. If your vertices aren't lined up on the axis line, you'll get overlapping faces or a gap between your faces.
snaptoaxis.jpg



Once your vertices are lined up, select the faces on the left side of the axis and delete. Make sure to delete the side you DON'T want to keep.
selectFaces.jpg
deleteFace.jpg




Next, with your object selected, click Mesh -> Mirror Geometry -> Option Box. In my scene, I'm mirroring over the x axis to the negative side.
mirror.jpg




Play around with scaling the torso and legs of the model until you're happy.
mirrored.jpg
You can mirror geometry as often as you like! Use it to your advantage.



Step 4: Head
In your fox2.ma scene, delete history by type, and click Modify -> Freeze transformations.
Override your foxLatest.ma with this and Save As a new fox3.ma file.


As before, select the outward faces and extrude your faces to match against the image in side view mode.
face1.jpg



For the face, be very very careful as to where you add edge loops. We'll leave the eyes until after the ears, so for now, make sure that you have edges at the front and back of your ears.
face2.jpg



You can choose to do either the extrude method or the stitching method. Because the ear will be offset at an angle, I chose to use the stitching method because I can create the ear mesh freely and rotate it however I need to stitch it on. Depending on the situation, you'll want to use a different method. For example, I prefer using the extrude method for limbs because I can just extrude straight down.

First, create a new cube. Like we did with the back leg, keep in mind how many vertices need to be stitched (in my case, 4 pairs) and match the cube with the reference image like so.
ear1.jpg




Add more edge loops like so. Match vertices against the image.
ear2.jpg

ear3.jpg




Select just the edge closest to you. Try to replicate how the ear in the image points outward by selecting this outer edge and pulling it back.
ear4.jpg





As you pull that edge back, make sure to scale the edge down to fit smoothly with the shape of the ear.
ear5.jpg
Like so.
ear6.jpg




Using the scale tool, straighten your edges to get clean lines like this.
ear7.jpg





Select the faces that represent the inside of the ear, extrude, and scale inwards so your ear looks like this.
ear8.jpg




Extrude once more and push in towards the back of the ear. Extrude again and do the same thing to get two segments.
EDIT: I realized that I had extruded too much into the ear so don't go as far back as I did here.
ear9.jpg




Select the top half of the faces and scale inwards to start tapering your ear. You can opt to use the soft select (hot key b) for this.
ear10.jpg
Continue tapering.
ear11.jpg




Spend some time fixing edge flow and straightening out kinks.
ear12.jpg




Go into smooth mode and manipulate your ear to match against the image. You'll often find that your mesh is a LOT smaller than expected once you smooth it so you'll want to adjust. Don't worry if your mesh looks too big or too spiky when you're not in smooth mode but do try to straighten out the bigger kinks.
ear13.jpg




Like we did with the back leg, bring your ear mesh close to where you'll be attaching it on the fox mesh.
near.jpg




I found that my ear mesh was a lot smaller than the original face so I selected the face on the fox, extruded, and scaled inward until the vertices lined up with my ear's vertices.
extrude.jpg




Again, delete the faces that are going to be stitched.
ear.jpg

hole.jpg




Select both meshes, go to .Mesh -> Combine. Go into vertex mode and begin stitching vertices together using Edit Mesh -> Merge to Center.
stitching.jpg




The sealed mesh should look something like this.
sealed.jpg




Again, spend time matching your smoothed mesh with the image and making adjustments.
ear20.jpg





Since I didn't have a front reference, I went ahead and mirrored my geometry again to see if the location of the ear looked normal. Adjust as you see fit.
ear21.jpg
ear22.jpg




Adjust the ears as you see fit. I pulled the vertices up using soft select to make them more pointy and ended up with this.
ears.jpg





Now onto the eyes. Back in side view, insert edge loops where the eyes start and end.
eyes9.jpg



Adjust the vertices like so. The vertices follow the slope of the forehead and there are 4 vertices roughly outlining the eyes.
eyes10.jpg




Take that face and extrude and push into the mesh.
There are many ways to make eye sockets. Some people will delete the face and extrude the edges inward only to seal it up later.
Whichever method you choose, make sure your mesh is "watertight", that is, there are no holes in your mesh.
eyes11.jpg

eyes12.jpg



I've extruded inwards a few more times and scaled the edges up so that I have a balloon inside the fox's head.
eyes13.jpg



Here it is in smooth mode.
eyes14.jpg



Along the edges of the eyes, add a few more edge loops. Because your mesh will be different from mine, you may need more or less than the four I've added here. Basically, add enough edge loops so that you can easily pull down these vertices to close the eyelid.
eyes15.jpg




Use the soft select tool to grab the vertices around the top lid and translate down. Check your side view so that the eye is still lined up with the image and check your top view so that your eyelid isn't sunken in.
eyes16.jpg




At this point, it might be a good idea to delete history and freeze transformations and save your file as fox4.ma and override foxLatest so we can start on the nose.
First, insert an edge loop behind the front of the nose like so. This is more of a marker for me for where the nose should end. It's a lot farther back than seems normal because I'm compensating for smooth mode.
nose1.jpg




Add two more edge loops for each side of the nose. The nose is going to occupy this space.
Notice that my edge loops went ALL the way around the fox. Generally, I try to avoid this but I know that I'm going to have to make a tail at some point and these nose edge loops line up nicely where the fox's tail will be.
nose2.jpg




Like we did with the eye socket, select the face, extrude, scale inwards, extrude, scale inwards, extrude, and translate back.Try to get something like this.
nose3.jpg


This is what it looks like in smooth mode.
nose4.jpg



I added another edge loop which will be the end of my nose.
nose5.jpg




Select the faces limited by the newest edge loop and extrude outwards.
nose6.jpg



Scale, translate, etc. until your nose looks about right. I did a lot of tweaking around until I was satisfied.
nose7.jpg




On to the mouth! (Look at the advanced modeling lab to see a different method of making the head and mouth via extrusions)
Look for a cut along the mouth in side view.
mouth1.jpg




With that edge highlighted, click Edit Mesh -> Detach. Move the edges apart so you can differentiate from the top and bottom sections.
mouth2.jpg




To seal up the gaping hole, use Append to Polygon to close up the bottom jaw. Make sure not to seal the bottom section to the roof of the mouth.
mouth3.jpg

Continue using the Append to Polygon tool. It might be handy to use the g hotkey to go back to this tool easily.
mouth4.jpg




The problem we have here is that if you were to close up this last hole, you'd have a 3 sided polygon. To avoid this, go to Mesh Tools -> Insert Edge Loop Tool -> Option Box.
mouth5.jpg



Change your settings like so. The idea is to get 1 edge loop right in the middle of the mouth.
mouth6.jpg



When you use the tool you should have something like this.
mouth7.jpg



Click and drag the new vertex you made so that it's near the end of the mouth.
mouth8.jpg



Select both vertices and click Edit Mesh -> Merge to center.
mouth9.jpg



Like so. Now do the same for the roof of the mouth.
mouth10.jpg



Don't forget to also merge the center vertices at the back of the mouth.This should finally seal the mouth.
mouth11.jpg




Back in side view, match your vertices up along the outline of the mouth but make sure the vertices don't overlap completely. You don't want faces cutting into each other.
mouth12.jpg



After a few cosmetic tweaks here it is in smooth mode.
fox.jpg




Before we get to the tail, select half the faces, align vertices by using the x snap tool, and mirror geometry.
THIS WILL BE A LOT EASIER IF YOU TURN OFF Retain component spacing. Look at the Handy tools section for help.
Feel free to delete history as well.



Start off by selecting the faces around where you'd want the tail to start.
tail1.jpg




The faces are a bit too big so I extruded them and scaled inwards twice. You may choose to do more or less.
tail2.jpg

tail3.jpg



I extruded once more and went into side view to pull out segments of the tail.
tail4.jpg




And out and out and out!
tail5.jpg




Then I scaled it up to make what I think a fox tail would look like. It's out straight because I'm lazy but also, this makes more sense when rigging/skinning. Much like how we ask you to model bipedal characters in the T or A pose.
tail6.jpg



Check your top view!
tail7.jpg



And finally, tweak, add edge loops, move vertices, all that good stuff to get in the DETAILS. This is including adding more edge loops at joints, rounding out sharp corners, and if you're feeling adventurous, making claws and teeth.

This is what my fox looks like after a couple tweaks. This is where I'll stop for the purposes of this lab but it is FAR FROM FINISHED.
For your models, we expect more detail. Good luck!
final.jpg



Lecture Topics not covered by this lab:
Deformers:
To create a deformer, go the the Deform menu, which has a list of useful deformers.
Here are a few useful ones:
Nonlinear -> Bend (does exactly what you think it does)
Nonlinear -> Twist (does exactly what you think it does)
Lattice (Creates a cube around your mesh, and you can deform your mesh by deforming the cube. This helps when your mesh is too complicated to make large manipulations. Make sure you use the option box to set the number of divisions)
In order to use a deformer, select your mesh, and then click on the deformer in the deform menu. If you use bend or twist, play with the values in the channel box. If you use the lattice deformer, switch to vertex mode and edit the points on the lattice.

Remember, deforms create a field that affects your mesh but does NOT permanently deform your mesh.
Once you are done applying a deformer to a mesh or a piece of a mesh, select your mesh and press Alt + Shift + D to delete by type -> history. This will get rid of the deformer. Try using a bend deformer to bend the tail of the fox! Make sure to play with the curvature, the high bound, and the low bound, and move the deformer so it only deforms the tail.

Sculpt:
Sculpting is better done in software like Zbrush (very expensive!) or Autodesk Mudbox (free for students!) but you can emulate these sculpting programs using the Mesh Tools -> Sculpting Tools. Play around with Sculpt, Smooth, and Grab. Make sure to mess with "Mirror" and "Invert" in the tool settings. The idea behind Sculpt and Grab is to pull and push in your mesh to achieve the bumps in organic models caused by muscle groups, bones, knuckles, and the like. The Smooth tool is particularly useful when your vertices/edges/faces are irregular in certain areas, even when your mesh is relatively low poly. It can often be a quick way to deal with messy topology.

Try using the sculpt tool to reshape any parts of the fox you are unsatisfied with.