
HEADING LARGE: INTRODUCTION
Sometimes, we want to see what our scene looks like without having to render. You (probably) haven't rendered using Renderman or any of the other renders yet, but rendering can take anywhere from 3 minutes a frame (that's fast) to 20+ minutes a frame. We expect your shorts to take about 5-7 minutes per frame but sometimes, we want immediate feedback. That's what playblasts are for.

HEADING SMALL: RENDERS VERSUS PLAYBLASTS
Renders calculate how light reacts with the shaders and objects in your scene, which is why they take so long. Playblasts, however, essentially take a screenshot of your viewport at every frame and spits out a video. Renders will ignore things like joints or nurbs but playblasts show everything. I suggest hiding what you don't need to see in a layer so that you can better critique your playblast. 

HEADING LARGE: CREATING PLAYBLSTS
First, go to Windows >> Playblasts >> option box

playblasts1.png

playblasts2.png

I'll go over a couple of the options. 
For Time Range:
If you select "Time Slider", the playblast will include whatever frames are visible in your timeline.
If you select "Start/End", you can more precisely control which frames will be playblasted. I suggest you use this option.

For Display size:
"From Window" will take a screenshot of exactly what is happening in your viewport
"From Render Settings" will take whatever you have in your Render Settings, which I go over in the next section.

The size of your playblast video must be specified in Render Settings as well. 

Make sure you have "Save to file" checked! Otherwise, your playblast will only pop up in your default video player but disappear once you quit. 

Quick Preview of Render Settings

We'll talk more about render settings in a couple of weeks during the rendering and composting lecture but for right now, all you need to know is how to specify the camera and the size of the image. 

There are many ways to get to settings, but one way is to click the first button on the RenderMan tab. If this doesn't work, for to RenderMan>>RenderMan Globals. 
playblasts3.png

Now set "Renderable Camera" to whatever camera you need (camera1 in this case). Here, I have Image Size>>Presets set to HD1080 but HD720 is fine for playblasts. 

playblasts4.png

That's it for playblast settings. Now you're all set to create the playblast by going to Windows>>Playblast or click Playblast in the option box.