<<<<<<< HEAD
HEADING LARGE: INTRODUCTION
This lab will cover simulation of fluids in Maya.
Please download the starter file attached below.
FILE: bifrost_lab_initial.ma
Inside this file you will find an animated bowl and a tub. In this lab, you will fill the bowl and the tub with water, and then allow the water to simulate as you watch the bowl tip over and fall into the tub.

HEADING MEDIUM: Familiarize yourself with the scene
When it comes to character animation, the playback speed should be set to 24 fps. This ensures that the timing of actions is displayed correctly in the viewport, possibly at the expense of dropping some frames if the computer cannot play the animation fast enough. Simulation engines, however, calculate each frame based on the state of the system in the preceding frames, so it is crucial to set the playback speed to play every frame. For now, we just want to see the existing animation of the bowl, so we will temporarily set the Playback Speed to "Real-Time (24fps)"
Go to Windows -> Settings -> Preferences -> Settings -> Time Slider -> Playback. Set the Playback Speed to Real Time [24 fps]. Press play and watch the bowl.
bowl.gif
Your animation should look like this, but slower.

HEADING LARGE: SIMULATION SETTINGS
Make sure that the "FX" menu set is selected in the dropdown menu in the upper left. Go to Bifrost -> Bifrost Options. Make sure Background Processing is enabled. Set the Maximum RAM usage to something reasonable that will not crash your computer, for instance 1/2 or 3/4 of your RAM. If necessary, change the disk location to the larger drive if you need to use one - fluid simulations can easily output gigabytes of data.
Bifrost.png

HEADING MEDIUM: SET UP EMITTER GEOMETRY
In order to add fluid to the scene we need to specify emitters - objects from which the liquid particles will be generated. In this scene we would need two such emitters - one to fill up the bowl and one to fill up the tub. Create a small cube and place it inside the bowl. Create a large cube and put it in the tub. In both cases, make sure that the cubes do not overlap with the geometry around them - imagine that the cube in the bowl should be able to comfortably float within it and the cube in the tub should be slightly smaller than the inner part of the tub.
Bifrost2.png
As usual, it is important to keep the scene clean. Select everything except for the bowl and Modify -> Freeze Transformations (the bowl cannot have transformations frozen because it is already animated). Now press Edit -> Delete All by Type -> History, in order to remove the construction history.

HEADING LARGE: CREATE SOLVER AND ATTACH EMITTERS
Now we are finally ready to set up the liquid itself. There are several tools created for the simulation of water in Maya. In this lab we will use the newest and most robust simulation engine called Bifrost.
Selects the cube in the bowl and go to Bifrost -> Liquid. This step is what actually creates the Liquid, and having the cube selected conveniently also makes the cube an emitter. Maya also draws a bounding box around each Bifrost liquid system, so the box should be around your cube now.
Bifrost3.png
Take a look at the outliner.
outliner.png
Select the box in the tub, select the wireframe bounding box from the last step, and go to Bifrost -> Add -> Emitter. This will tell the Bifrost solver that in addition to the cube from the last step, this large box will also emit particles.

If you work in Maya 2016, make sure to turn off the Bifrost Continuous Emission in the attributes of the cube that emits the water for the tub. You can do that by typing "0" in the corresponding channel. If you work in Maya 2017, the continuous emission is off by default, but the settings are on the bifrostEmitterProps node in your outliner.
Bifrost4.png
Set your Playback Speed to play every frame and Max Playback Speed to 24 fps. Select the liquid again (either by clicking the bounding box or from the outliner) and press play. Notice a fast yellow and a slow green bars grow on the time slider from the beginning. The yellow bar reflects the frames that have been submitted to the solver. The green bar reflects the frames that have completed and cached. Now if you scrub through the green frames you can see their simulation. Whenever you change any attributes of the simulation, these will be recalculated. If you want to clear the cache manually, you can do so by clicking Bifrost -> Flush Scratch Cache.
Bifrost6.png
Select the large box and the small cube and turn visibility off in the channel box. You don't want these rendering.
Notice that the particles fall through everything. This liquid system does not know the liquid is supposed to collide with the tub yet.
Bifrost5.png
We'll fix that soon, but first let's look at some of the Bifrost's parameters.

HEADING MEDIUM: TWIDDLING DISPLAY PARAMETERS SO YOUR VIEWPORT DOESN'T TAKE FOREVER
Open the Attribute Editor and go to liquidShape1. Open the Display drop-down.
Bifrost7.png
The first thing you see is this.
If you select Voxels, you get a slightly better representation of the final look, but it might make your graphics card cry (in other words, your viewport is going to lag when you scrub).
The default Particle Display menu is pretty good, but you can change the Max Particle Display count if your display is chugging. I turned the Point Size up to 3.0. Also, notice the blue-to-white color ramp under "Color Channel Remap". Above that, it shows "Color Channel": Velocity. This means that the color of the particle is proportional to how fast it's moving. This is perhaps the most useful attribute to base the coloring scheme on. No need to change anything there.
HEADING LARGE: MAKING THE BOWL AND TUB COLLIDE WITH WATER
This step will finally stop the water from falling through everything. Select the tub and the liquid and click Bifrost -> Add -> Collider. Repeat the same with the bowl.


Don't forget the turn off the visibility of the cube after you are satisfied with the results.

Now the water will behave as it should.
pour.gif

HEADING MEDIUM: ADDING A MOTION FIELD
You might notice that the water sticks to the bowl very strongly as it pours out. Let's pretend we don't like this, so we are going to add a motion field to force the water away from the bowl. Motion fields are used to force your liquid in any direction with any amount of strength.
Place a cube right where you want to redirect the liquid.
Bifrost9.png

If you are using Maya 2016, select the cube and click Bifrost -> Add -> Accelerator. Select the cube, go to the attribute editor and under the Bifrost menu go to the Acceleration option.
If you are using Maya 2017, select both the cube and the liquid and click Bifrost -> Add -> Motion Field. Select bifrostMotionField in the outliner, go to the attribute editor and under the bifrostMotionFieldContainer tab go to the Field Direction attributes.

Looking at the axis indicator on the lower left of the viewport, it looks like we want to push the water in the negative z and positive y directions. Set the direction to 0.00, 1.00, -1.00. Now the water should stick slightly less. Try playing with the direction magnitude.
Bifrost10.png
Don't forget the turn off the visibility of the cube after you are satisfied with the results.

HEADING LARGE: STOPPING THE EMITTER ONCE THE BOWL DROPS
By now you have probably noticed that the small cube emitter continues to pour even after the bowl drops. Let's fix this.

Select the small cube emitter in the outliner (2016) or bifrostEmitterProps (2017), open it in the channel box, and go to the Bifrost Liquid Continuous Emission attribute. Notice this is set to on. With the large cube, we set it to off. With the small cube, we want to "animate" it going from on to off. Go to the frame right before the bowl falls, right click on the words "Bifrost Liquid Continuous Emission", and click Key Selected. Afterwards, move forward a frame, change the value to "0" and click Key Selected again.
Bifrost12.png

HEADING MEDIUM: KILL PLANE
This is useful if you don't want any particles falling down to infinity and crashing your computer. Select the liquid, and click Bifrost -> Add -> Kill Plane.
Drag it down and put it under everything. Make it big enough to see, but Bifrost will assume it extends in all directions infinitely, so you don't need to make it huge.
Bifrost13.png

HEADING MEDIUM: TWEAKS
Open your Liquid in the Attribute Editor and go to bifrostLiquidContainer1.
There is a whole mess of options and parameters. Below are some of the most useful ones.
Solver Attributes - Unchecking Enable will stop the solver entirely. You can also tweak the start frame and gravity. These should be self-explanatory.
Resolution - You probably noticed that the water looks gooey and forms into large clumps and intersects with colliders. You can shrink these clumps by decreasing the Master Voxel Size. Be careful. Making this too low will make your calculation take forever, but it's the best thing you can do for more realistic water.
<b>Foam</b> - If you want foam, you can enable it. Most of the defaults work pretty well
<b>Caching</b> - if this is not checked, solver recalculates simulation every time you press play.
<b>Viscosity</b> - Play with this if you need to make your fluid thicker and more sticky, for instance if you want it to behave like honey.

HEADING LARGE: SUBMISSION
Go to Bifrost -> Compute and Cache to Disk. Make sure Write Mode is set to Write All. This will save your simulation.
Set the Master Voxel Size in the Resolution to 0.5 and play your whole simulation one last time. This will take a while. Take a nap.
When you're done, make a playblast and attach it to your submission.

HEADING MEDIUM: Rendering (optional for submission)
Select the liquid and open the attribute editor. Go to Liquid Shape -> Bifrost Meshing and check Enable.
Bifrost15.png
This creates a mesh for your particle system. This is important because RenderMan has no way of rendering the Bifrost object, so it needs a mesh and a RenderMan material. Add a PxrLMGlass, and make sure the "Thin" option is checked in the attributes of the material. This prevents it from looking dark.
Capture16.png

Make sure the liquid itself has its visibility turned off or RenderMan will try to render it and only render the bounding box.
Add any RenderMan lighting from the RenderMan menu and render.
Bifrost14.png
