HEADING LARGE: INTRODUCTION

This lab will go over how to add fire and smoke very quickly using presets.

Start off by downloading this file:

FILE: fluids_lab_initial.ma


This file should contain a club that slowly turns under a floating ball. We're going to light the tip of the club on fire and have the flames lick around the floating ball.

By now, hopefully you have completed the animation labs, and therefore know how to set your Playback Speed to "Real-Time (24fps)". (Hint: Google it).
Animation.gif

HEADING LARGE: MAKING A FLUID FROM SCRATCH
To start off, make sure the FX menu is selected on the upper left (F5). Do Fluids -> 3D container. This should create a wireframe box around. You can use the option box and look at the settings, but this is not necessary.
Capture.png
Select the ball and the fluid container box and do Fluids -> Add/Edit Contents -> Emit From Object. Look in the option box and make sure it matches mine.
Capture2.png
At this point, you must switch your playback speed to Play Every Frame (in your animation settings). This ensures that frames won't skip, and when one frame skips, the solver cannot evaluate the frame after it. Now play your simulation. This looks nothing like a fire. To see what it looks like rendered, we are going to use a default Maya renderer called Mental Ray. If you cannot get Mental Ray working, you can also use Renderman, but it takes excessively long for fire and isn't really worth how much better it looks.

<b>Mental Ray:</b>
Go to Windows -> Settings/Preferences -> Plugin Manager
Make sure Mayatomr.mll is loaded. It should come with Maya, but if you cannot find Mayatomr.mll, visit this link: https://knowledge.autodesk.com/support/mental-ray/downloads/caas/downloads/content/mental-ray-plugin-for-maya-2016.html?_ga=1.161103613.1315064163.1442705715
Capture3.png
Pick this option to open Render Settings
Capture4.png
Make sure your settings match mine.
Capture5.png
Press the Render button (circled). IPR button is right next to it.

Your fluid should look like mine.
Capture7.png
Congrats! You made a basic fluid that looks nothing like a fire. We can tweak 50 settings for a while until it does, but instead, we'll copy a built-in example.

HEADING LARGE: USING AN EXAMPLE

Making a decent-looking fire out of the basic fluid settings is slow and really difficult if you don't know what you're doing. To avoid all that, we can save a bunch of time by using examples. Clean the fluids from the outliner until it looks like mine.
Capture8.png

Go to Fluids -> Get Example -> Fluid. Select the "Fire" folder on the left and select the TurbulentFlame.ma
Capture9.png
Middle-mouse drag the TurbulentFlame.ma onto your scene. Press play. You should see a flaming donut.
Animation2.gif
We want the fluid to also come from the ball at the tip of the stick. Select the fluid bounding box and the ball and do Fluids -> Add/Edit Contents -> Emit From Object like before. Move the bounding box up to be around the tip of the club and the floating ball. We no longer need the donut, so delete the things I have selected from the outliner. Notice the TurbulentFlame:Flame remains (our flame system), and stick -> ball now has a fluid emitter under it.
Capture11.png
You should see this.

HEADING LARGE: MAKING THE BALL COLLIDE

Select the floating ball and the fluid and do Fluids -> Make Collide. Your flames should now lick around the floating ball.

Try rendering a frame and seeing what it looks like with Mental Ray.
Capture12.png
It still doesn't look like fire, but at least it behaves correctly.

HEADING LARGE: TWEAKING SHADING

In this step, we'll actually fiddle with fluid shader settings to make it look better. IPR comes in handy (the mental ray IPR button is right next to the render button).

Open the fluid in the Attribute Editor. There are a bunch of dropdown menus. I'll go over some of the important ones, but you won't have to tweak most of them thanks to the example we stole.

Container Properties - Increasing the resolution will yield a higher quality fire. Not important until we are done. Boundary should be self-explanatory
Contents Method - Keeping everything on Dynamic Grid yields the best results.
Display - You can tweak these things if your Viewport is chugging, but fluids aren't too hard on the viewport.
Dynamic Simulation - some physical parameters. Don't need to tweak these for this lab. Fire shouldn't have viscosity or friction.
Auto-resize - makes the bounding box fit your fluid automatically. Useful for explosions. Not useful for controlled flames.
Contents Details - Have fun twiddling these if you like. Make sure you only change one thing at a time. Effects can very quickly go out of control.
Shading - The important one we're about to tweak

Now is a good time to turn IPR on. Draw a box around the fire and it will render. You can try different dropoff shapes, but I like Sphere.
Notice Color is black, as it should be.
Incandescence maps Temperature to a range from a pale yellow to black. Changing the ramp and the offset has an effect on color.

Opacity maps Density to the spike curve. Basically, when the density is below the value of the spike, it is invisible. This is to prevent low-density areas of the flame from appearing. Also, the curve falls off because after heating up sufficiently, fluids become less dense and rise out of the fire. Try changing the shape of the curve and the offset.

After tweaking Opacity and Density, I changed my fire to this:
Capture14.png
And if you can't figure it out, my settings look like this:
Capture17.png

HEADING LARGE: CACHING YOUR SIMULATION
You have probably noticed by now that you can't scrub around your animation. This is because the fluid recalculates every time you press play. In order to fix it, select your fluid, go to nCache -> Create New Cache -> Maya Fluid. This will calculate once and save your calculation to a file so you can scrub through the time slider, and it saves even when you close the file. Only do this when you are happy with the simulation, ideally after turning up the resolution within Container Properties (see Step 4).

HEADING MEDIUM: RENDERING YOUR FRAMES

Mental Ray is fast enough with this basic scenario to actually render the whole simulation in a reasonable amount of time. But let's pretend we were doing this with Renderman. You only want the fire to render in Mental Ray so you can composite it later with After Effects. Select the fluid, and at the bottom of the channel box, go to the "Render" tab. Pick Layers and Create Layer from Selected. This creates a new Layer called Layer 1. Call this layer Fire.

Make sure this layer is selected. Set your render image file format to OpenEXR. Go ahead and switch to the Rendering menu set. Do Render -> Batch Render.

Open the rendered images as an image sequence in Photoshop. Tweak Exposure or Saturation if necessary, and render a video. Attach this video to your submission.

Here is my result from this lab:

