HEADING LARGE: STORYBOARDING
As stated in lecture, the way you can break down what storyboarding is is simply thinking of it as staging and acting. It is problem-solving in the way that you should be thinking “What is my story, and how can that be best communicated visually?”

Storyboarding is very helpful in terms of planning out how your final film is going to look, when the camera cuts are going to occur, how the characters should act. It is not only used in 3D animation, but also in live action films. Overall, storyboarding is extremely helpful when you have a tight schedule to finish your film.

The way this section will be structured is that in this first part, we will be talking about staging, and in the second part, acting. These are mostly going to be bullet point-esque notes that I’ve found useful in thinking about how to make the most of my storyboards for the story. So, let’s begin.

HEADING MEDIUM: Staging (AKA Camera)
Camera is extremely important when determining what emotions you want to evoke in a certain part of the story. This will be varied, as there are going to be different emotional beats at different parts of the story.

Overall, you will want to avoid using camera movement within your UCBUGG shorts, simply because students usually get too excited about cameras in Maya and move their shot more often than necessary.

Here are some examples of camera shots:

camshots.png

<b>Scene</b>: the action that occurs in one shot before a camera cut happens
It is important for audience to not get lost in the universe - what this means is that the audience knows where the characters are located at all times. Lightly drawing hints of background really helps - having certain props or bg elements in the shot can help the audience keep track of where the character is, especially if you are cutting to different angles in the same area.

Watch your favorite movie with the sound off to analyze how long they chose to hold the shot and framing and how it is effective in communicating the emotion or tone of the scene.

Remember that staging and acting are only vehicles to communicate the relationship of your characters, the conflict, their emotions, and more.

HEADING MEDIUM: Acting
Think about how acting is unique to your own character. How would they react if they were introverted versus if they were extroverted?
Similar to how we broke down what storyboarding was, to water down what acting is, you want to think about the <b>key poses</b> of your character and their <b>facial expressions</b>.

HEADING SMALL: KEY POSES
For example, if someone is throwing a ball, you would need to have the <b>initial pose</b> (the wind-up), the <b>mid-pose</b> (how the character is throwing the ball), and the <b>follow-through pose</b> (after the ball leaves the character’s hand)

ball.png

HEADING SMALL: FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
For example, if a character is about to cry, you may have one drawing where the character is almost neutral, another one where the character’s face scrunches up, another where eyes open and tear falls.

as-lab-crying.png

Staging and acting go hand-in-hand. You wouldn’t necessarily have a close up shot if your character is in the middle of some fight sequence, and at the same time, you wouldn’t have an extreme long shot if you want to focus on the character’s eyes twitching.

HEADING MEDIUM: GOOD RESOURCES TO LEARN MORE ABOUT STORYBOARDING
These were all recommended to me by professional storyboard artists, and are ultimately very great resources to follow.

http://tobyshelton.blogspot.com/ - Toby Shelton is a storyboard artist who has worked at Disney, DreamWorks, and more. You can see a lot of his work on feature films here.

http://sevencamels.blogspot.com/ - Recommended by many storyboard artists. Wonderful info and analysis on story

http://floobynooby.com/comp1.html - Goes into depth on the process of storyboarding. Great foundation topics and pointers.


HEADING LARGE: PITCHING
Pitching is definitely one of the hardest parts that comes with storyboarding. You absolutely cannot avoid practicing beforehand, and the audience can definitely sense when pitches are not rehearsed. Here are some tips for pitching I found useful for myself and hope they could be of use to you as well:

- Pitch with excitement and confidence
- Adding on to that: people usually get excited about the same things you do if you are also clearly excited about your idea

- If you’re pitching a story, make sure to PAUSE
- Don’t rush through your story - even though you only have one minute to pitch, that doesn’t mean you should squeeze every single detail of your story in as fast as possible. - Plan out key elements of your story so your words can sink into people and they can understand your story.
- Most of all, speak clearly and avoid quietness
- Practice with your storyboards and make sure the boards are clear and concise and don’t conflict with your verbal pitch

HEADING MEDIUM: GREAT EXAMPLE OF PITCHING WITH STORYBOARDS
https://vimeo.com/151242159 - Eric Goldberg is known best for his work at Disney and Warner Bros. In this video, he pitches an unproduced 1947 Donald Duck storyboard.
